.TH SLCL 1 slcl

.SH NAME
slcl \- a suckless cloud

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B slcl
.RB [-t
.IR tmpdir ]
.RB [-p
.IR port ]
.RB dir

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B slcl
is a simple and fast implementation of a web file server, commonly
known as "cloud storage" or simply "cloud", that takes a directory
.IR dir
where the credentials database and user files are stored (see
.B FILES
below).

.SH OPTIONS
.BI \-t " tmpdir"
Defines the directory where temporary files created by
.B slcl
are stored. If not specified, the environment variable
.I TMPDIR
is selected. However, if no value is available for
.IR TMPDIR ,
.I /tmp
is selected.

.BI \-p " port"
Defines the TCP
.I port
.B slcl
will listen to. If not specified, a random port is used.

.SH FILES

.B slcl
consumes a path to a directory with the following tree structure:

.PP
.EX
\ .
 ├── db.json
 ├── public/
 └── user/
.EE

Where:

.TP
.B db.json
This file is the credentials database, in JSON.
.B Note:
if not found,
.B slcl
creates a database with no users, with file mode bits set to
.IR 0600 .
The following schema is expected:
.PP
.EX
{
    "users": [{
        "name":	"...",
        "password":	"...",
        "salt":	"...",
        "key":	"...",
        "quota": "..."
    }]
}
.EE

.TP
.B public/
This directory contains read-only files that can be accessed without
authentication, implemented as symlinks to other files in
.BR user/ .
.B Note:
this directory must be created before running
.BR slcl .

.TP
.B user/
This directory contains user directories, which in turn contain anything users
put into them.
.B Note:
this directory, as well as any user directories inside it, must be created
before running
.BR slcl .

.SH EXAMPLES

Below, there is an example of a directory with two users, namely
.I alice
and
.IR john ,
storing one file each, as well as a publicly-shared file by
.IR alice :

.PP
.EX
\ .
 ├── db.json
 ├── public
 │   └── 416d604c03a1cbb2 -> user/alice/file.txt
 └── user
     ├── alice
     │   └── file.txt
     └── john
         └── file2.txt
.EE

.SH LICENSE
See the LICENSE file for further reference.

.SH AUTHORS
Written by Xavier Del Campo Romero.

.SH TODO
Implement user quota and public file sharing.
